File: [Patrick_Gardiner]_Kierkegaard_(Past_Masters)(BookFi).pdf Annotation summary: --Page 9 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Like Marx and Nietzsche, he emerges as one of the outstanding iconoclasts and rebels of nineteenth-century thought, writers whose works were composed in conscious opposition to the prevailing assumptions and conventions of their age and whose crucial contentions only achieved widespread recognition after they were dead --Page 10 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: When he referred to the prospect he treated it as an occasion, not for self-congratulation, but for sardonic comment. For the persons whose approbation he anticipated were those he labelled 'professors'; in other words, future members of the selfsame academic institutions which during his lifetime were the target of some of his sharpest criticism. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: This was its preoccupation with what he called the 'illusions of objectivity', exhibiting itself, on the one hand, in a tendency to smother the vital core of subjective experience beneath layers of historical commentary and pseudoscientific generalization and, on the other, in a proneness to discuss ideas from an abstract theoretical viewpoint that took no account of their significance for the particular outlooks and commitments of flesh-and-blood human beings. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Sören Aabye Kierkegaard was born in Copenhagen on 5 May 1813. He was the seventh child of Michael Pedersen Kierkegaard, a retired hosier who had been released from serfdom in his youth and who had since become relatively wealthy, partly through his own efforts but also as a result of inheriting a considerable fortune from an uncle. --Page 11 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Kierkegaard's mother, whom his father had married after the early death of his first wife, had been the latter's maid; she was illiterate and appears to have played a somewhat shadowy part in his upbringing. His father, by contrast, was a dominant influence. Selfeducated and shrewd in business, he was at the same time a devout member of the Lutheran Church with a strong belief in duty and self-discipline. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Kierkegaard was later to recall the 'absolute obedience' that was demanded of him as a child, but it was not this that made the greatest impression upon him. More potent, at any rate in its subsequent effects, was the atmosphere of gloom and religious guilt that emanated from a parent who believed that both he and his family lay under a mysterious curse and who, notwithstanding his worldly success, lived in constant expectation of divine retribution. Thus, in a retrospective entry in his journals, his son could speak of 'the dark background which, from the very earliest time, was part of my life' and recollect the 'dread with which my father filled my soul, his own frightful melancholy, and all the things in this connection which I do not even note down' (J 273). Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: he was fascinated by his father's vivid if morbid imagination, appears to have been impressed by his intellect and powers of argument, and always remained bound to his memory by some profound emotional affinity that involved a strange mixture of love and fear. --Page 23 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Nor, again, was he centrally concerned with topics of the kind that formed the focus of philosophical attention in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries; questions concerning the fundamental structure of the universe or the nature and scope of our knowledge of reality were not amongst those that he principally sought to pursue. And it may further be argued that the theoretical ambitions which had largely inspired his great predecessors—ambitions profoundly influenced by the sweeping advances that had been achieved in the physical sciences—were in any case ones to which he was, both by temperament and by conviction, deeply averse. The very conception of the 'speculative' thinker, set apart from the contingencies of everyday living and coolly contemplating existence from a privileged vantage-point, was apt to arouse his suspicion, even --Page 24 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: antipathy; amongst other things, he was prone to treat it as involving a bland indifference to what mattered to people as individuals whose real interests found no recognition at the hands of 'systematists and objective philosophers'. In the light of all this it is perhaps not surprising that some critics have portrayed him as being an extreme representative of the Romantic revolt against the ideals of the European Enlightenment, while in the eyes of others he has been reviewed as an anti-philosopher rather than a philosopher, not merely out of sympathy with the aims of dispassionate enquiry but actively intent upon undermining the assumptions of those who pursued it. --Page 25 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Were empirical methods of the type employed by natural scientists the only ones available to us, or was it possible—as some theorists had contended—to acquire a superior insight into reality which was not subject to empirical constraints and which could be attained solely on the basis of ideas and principles whose validity was transparent to the unaided eye of reason? It was a primary part of Kant's purpose to settle such disputes once and for all, and in his Critique of Pure Reason he undertook to demonstrate that neither reason nor sensory experience was by itself sufficient for the acquisition of knowledge: both were essential. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: According to Kant, it was true that human cognition necessarily conformed to an underlying framework of a priori forms and concepts which were imposed by the mind upon the data supplied by the senses; at the same time, the legitimate application of these was confined to the sensory sphere and any attempt to extend them to establish truths concerning what obtained outside that sphere must always be unjustified. In the light of this, Kant drew a firm line between hypotheses of the sort put forward in the natural sciences, which were susceptible to confirmation by experiment and observation, and theories which purported to make cognitive claims about a supersensible or transcendent order of things that lay --Page 26 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: beyond the range of such procedures. Claims of the latter kind belonged to 'dogmatic' or speculative metaphysics, an 'old and sophistical mock-science' whose pretensions he believed himself to have shown finally to be empty and without warrant. As he put it elsewhere: 'All knowledge of things out of mere pure understanding or pure reason is nothing but illusion, and only in experience is truth. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Hume's response to 'the imperfections of natural reason' in this domain was one of sceptical irony and found characteristic expression in a well-known passage of his Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding in which he implied that no reasonable individual could sincerely endorse the doctrines of Christianity without being conscious of 'a continual miracle in his own person'. By comparison, Kant's reaction was both more complex and less dismissive and was epitomized in his claim—by no means ironical in intent—that he had found it necessary to deny knowledge in order to make room for faith. What did this somewhat cryptic assertion amount to? Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Whatever confusions Kant may have discerned in the pro--Page 27 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: jects of speculative metaphysicians, he should not be understood as thereby wishing to rule out of court the very conception of a supersensible realm; indeed, his own 'transcendental idealism', in which a distinction was drawn between the empirical world of phenomenal objects or 'appearances' and a 'noumenal' world of things in themselves that was inaccessible to experience, can be said to have presupposed it. What he did maintain was that nothing whatsoever at the theoretical level could be known about such a realm. Thus the cognitive claims of speculative theology, inasmuch as they purported to provide us with demonstrable truths concerning the supersensible, were certainly unacceptable; but so, too, were the arguments of those who contended that it was possible conclusively to demonstrate their falsity; in this respect the atheist was no better off than the theist. There was hence a sense in which Kant considered that his position at least protected the tenets of religious faith from the assaults of 'dogmatic' criticism. But he also believed that it was open to him to take a further step in their defence. This involved switching attention from the speculative or theoretical use of reason to its practical use, and for him that meant taking account of the presuppositions of the moral consciousness; it was there that reason under its practical aspect directly manifested itself. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Kant did not, for example, accept Hume's suggestion that all behaviour, together with the standards in terms of which it was morally assessed, must ultimately be explained or interpreted by reference to the passions and desires of mankind. He thought that trying in this way to base moral choice and evaluation upon contingent wants and sentiments was tantamount to reducing them to something purely subjective and susceptible to --Page 28 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: inevitable variations. But such a conception of their status was at odds with the entrenched conviction that fundamental moral laws possessed universal validity, binding upon all persons irrespective of empirical circumstances and independently of individual preferences or proclivities; the mere recognition that it conflicted with our inex-pungeable intuitions about the objective requirements of morality was alone sufficient to render it implausible. It did not follow, however, that we should revert instead to the time-honoured opinion that these requirements derived their validity from the alleged fact that they expressed the will of God and embodied his commands. --Page 37 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: The conception of God, for example, as a transcendent being to whom human beings stand in an external relation of dependence was a reflection on the theological plane of a mode of thinking which Hegel's approach was expressly designed to supersede; associated with an historical outlook which he referred to in his Phenomenology of Mind as 'the unhappy consciousness', it involved the projection into an unearthly 'beyond' of potentialities that human beings, as vehicles of spirit, were destined to realize at the level of earthly existence. It was certainly no part of his purpose to rehabilitate, let alone try to justify, such ideas. When properly understood, on the other hand, religious beliefs could be regarded as giving pictorial expression to matters that had been conceptually articulated and substantiated in his own theory: thus the Christian doctrines of the fall and of subsequent redemption through the incarnation of Christ were susceptible to an interpretation that showed them to be consonant with Hegel's notion of the manner in which --Page 38 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: spirit overcame internal divisions, ultimately returning to itself and achieving complete fulfilment and comprehension of its nature through man. In this sense Christianity was not, or not merely, a matter of subjective faith, practical or otherwise. Correctly viewed, its contents could be seen to be rationally acceptable and objectively valid. Hence it had, to all appearances, found a final and secure resting-place within the hospitable walls of the Hegelian system. Reason and religion had been reconciled. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: But at what price? What did it really mean to assert that the contents of Christianity and Hegelianism were the same? Some of the master's more radically minded followers, who came to be known as the Y oung Hegelians, took it upon themselves to elicit what they believed to be the actual implications of this claim. In his extremely influential Life of Jesus |I835) D. F. Strauss (1808-74) presented a critical account of the Gospel stories in which he argued that they must be evaluated in a way that paid due attention to 'the spirit of the ancient world and of the people of that time'. The notion of a 'God-man' who mysteriously combined supernatural and human attributes was the product of a mentality which could only express its underlying vision in a concrete and quasi-historical form. Looked at from the higher standpoint of philosophy, however, and stripped of its mythological trappings, the Christian doctrine of the incarnation should be read as svmbolizing the essential unity of the spiritual and the natural in the life and development of the human species as a whole. Thus the dualism that beset the traditional dogmas of religious belief, according to which God and man belonged to separate spheres of existence, must be replaced by the insight that it was through humanity alone that the 'divine essence' could be realized. God and human were in fact one; and from this it was a short step to the contention— explicitly advanced by Ludwig Feuerbach (1804-72)—that the God of religion was no more than the externalization, in an imaginary and idealized form, of --Page 39 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: man's own nature and fundamental attributes. The conception of a divinity set over against the world and demanding worship and obedience was an illusion, a 'dream of the human mind'; man's supposed knowledge of God amounted in the end to no more than man's knowledge of himself. Hence the Hegelian aspiration to vindicate the claims of religion in rational terms had apparently reached its culmination in a theory that entailed their virtual supersession. As Feuerbach himself succinctly put it, the secret of theology had finally been shown to be anthropology. --Page 40 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: It was, however, another thing to suggest—as Kant himself had gone on to do—that the limitations of theoretical or cognitive reason could somehow be circumvented by an appeal to reason in its ethical capacity. The contention that beliefs in God and in personal immortality were, as 'postulates of practical reason', necessarily presupposed by the moral consciousness was tantamount to treating rnorality rather than religion as the central object of human concern; furthermore, it was a corollary of this position that it set the historical aspects of Christianity in a perspective which tended to accord them a purely peripheral significance. And far from being met, such difficulties were (if anything) accentuated by the Hegelian aspiration to demonstrate that --Page 41 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: religion was susceptible of an interpretation which showed it to be after all a repository of objective truth. The claim that religious ideas should be construed as expressing, at a primitive and mythical stage of thinking, a content whose hidden import awaited formulation within the framework of an all-embracing metaphysical system might have found acceptance amongst a number of contemporary theologians. Y et in Kierkegaard's eyes it meant in effect a radical revision of the Christian message, this being finally replaced by an entirely different set "of principles. Thus, whatever might have been Hegel's own express intentions, there was at least a sense in which the writers of the Y oung Hegelian school displayed a more perceptive grasp of the underlying tenor of his thought than those who welcomed it as providing a rational substantiation of traditional teachings. The gap between metaphysical idealism and humanistic atheism might at first glance seem a wide one; it was not, however, difficult to discern how the transition had been made, once references to the activities of concrete human beings had been substituted for Hegel's mystifyingly abstract allusions to the workings of absolute spirit. --Page 42 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: My principal thought was that in our age, because of the great increase of knowledge, we had forgotten what it means to exist, and what inwardness signifies, and that the misunderstanding between speculative philosophy and Christianity was explicable on that ground. I now resolved to go back as far as possible, in order not to reach the religious mode of existence too soon, to say nothing of the specifically Christian mode of existence ... If men had forgotten what it means to exist religiously, they had doubtless also forgotten what it means to exist as human beings; this must therefore be set forth. But above all it must not be done in a dogmatising manner, for then the misunderstanding would instantly take the explanatory effort to itself in a new misunderstanding, as if existing consisted in getting to know something about this or that. (CUP 223) Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: His point is a relatively unproblematic one and concerns the manner in which he believed the majority of his contemporaries were prone to think of themselves and to lead their lives. Thus he considered that they had succumbed to an impersonal and anonymous mode of consciousness which precluded spontaneous feeling and was devoid of a secure sense of self-identity. Everything tended to be seen in 'abstract' terms, as theoretical possibilities which could be contemplated and compared but to the concrete realization of which people were unwilling to commit themselves. If they attended to their own attitudes --Page 43 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: or emotions it was through a thick haze of pseudo-scientific expressions or cliche-ridden phrases which they had picked up from books or newspapers rather than in the direct light of their own inner experience. Living had become a matter of knowing rather than doing, accumulating information and learning things by rote as opposed to taking decisions that bore the stamp of individual passion or conviction. What this led to was the formation of an outlook in which everything was approached through the medium of set responses and automatic reactions; people knew what they were supposed to say, but they no longer attached any real significance to the words they used. As Kierkegaard wrote in the long section of A Literary Review entitled 'The Present Age': Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: In fact there are handbooks for everything, and very soon education, all the world over, will consist in learning a greater or lesser number of comments by heart, and people will excel according to their capacity for singling out the various facts like a printer singling out the letters, but completely ignorant of the meaning of anything. (PA 88-9) Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Moreover, these trends were accompanied by a propensity to identify with amorphous abstract entities like 'humanity' or 'the public', people thereby absolving themselves from individual responsibility for what they thought and said. To put it crudely, there was safety in numbers: 'everyone can have an opinion; but they have to band together numerically in order to have one' (PA 91). And somewhat similar considerations applied at the level of practical behaviour. People were ready enough to talk of doing things 'on principle', but they were apt to treat the principles they appealed to as if they were endowed with a purely external or impersonal authority, unrelated to the agent's own preferences and concerns; in this sense, one could 'do anything "on principle" and avoid all personal responsibility' (PA 85). As Kierkegaard remarked elsewhere, 'no man, none, dares to say I'; instead, a species of 'ventriloquism' had become de rigueur—the ordinary person had become a mouthpiece of --Page 44 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: public opinion, the professor a mouthpiece of theoretical speculation, the pastor a mouthpiece of religious meditation. All were in different ways submissive to abstractions to which they attributed an independent reality. Rather than confront the fact that everyone is finally accountable to himself for his life, character, and outlook, they took refuge in a depersonalized realm of reified ideas and doctrines. --Page 73 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Kierkegaard's portrayal of distinguishable modes of life and experience prepared the way for the two major works upon which his reputation as a religious thinker chiefly rests: the brief and relatively condensed Philosophical Fragments and the lengthy, polemical, and often very repetitive Concluding Unscientific Postscript. Like their predecessors, they were both published under a pseudonym—in the present instance that of Johannes Climacus (John the Climber)—but with the difference that here Kierkegaard's name also appeared, he being referred to as their 'editor'. Whatever precise significance should be attached to the change, it is at least reasonable to assume that in this case the views expressed were intended to be understood as being essentially his own: his aim was to exhibit, as explicitly and forcefully as possible, the true significance of the 'misunderstanding between speculative philosophy and Christianity' which he believed to be endemic to the intellectual outlook of his age. The aesthetic writings might have helped to indicate, albeit indirectly and allusively, how it was that various psychological and social attitudes had contributed to the growth of this misunderstanding; there remained, however, the central task of delineating its fundamental character and of eliciting its presuppositions. Such was the task to which he now addressed himself, and in doing so he chose as his principal targets Hegel and those who had been influenced by him. None the less, and despite his intense preoccupation with current tendencies, he regarded his diagnosis of what was involved as being of more than merely contemporary relevance. It had wider implications; au fond, the questions at issue concerned the very nature of religious faith and its relation to the resources of human thought and --Page 74 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: rationality. The manner in which some of these questions arose at the level of practical choice had already been indicated in Fear and Trembling. In the Fragments and the Postscript they were to reappear, but now transposed to a context where more was at stake than the scope of ethics and the limits of moral reasoning, and where faith in the specifically Christian sense, rather than that ascribed to Abraham, became the prime object of attention. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: Behind both books one can in fact discern the influence of two eighteenth-century authors who, in Kierkegaard's eyes, had already brought certain crucial aspects of Christian belief into sharp focus. One of these was J. G. Hamann (1730-88), a maverick thinker whose writings Kierkegaard had first encountered in his student days and whose uncompromising attacks on rationalism—both in theology and elsewhere—seem to have struck him with the force of a revelation. The other was G. E. Lessing (1729-81), whose seminal essay On the Proof of the Spirit and of Power he appears to have come across some years later through reading Strauss's The Christian Faith. About the significance of Hamarm's impact there will be something to say in due course. The views expressed in Lessing's essay, on the other hand, are of more immediate concern, since they were explicitly referred to by Kierkegaard as constituting a common point of departure for the Fragments and the Postscript alike. --Page 112 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: The situation in question was one that Hegel associated with religion and which he attributed to 'the unhappy consciousness'. As we saw in Chapter 2, this expression was introduced to designate a certain stage in the course of man's historical development. At such a stage he was aware of himself as a divided being, 'dual-natured' and 'inwardly disrupted'. On the one hand, he was conscious of himself as a finite particular, located in the world of experience and subject to the vicissitudes of temporal change; on the other, he was haunted by the thought of possessing an 'unchangeable' or ideal essence that subsisted independently of the contingencies which beset his empirical reality. These two aspects of his nature he was unable to bring together with the result that he identified himself with the first, apprehending the second under the form of a transcendent 'other' or 'alien Being' to which he stood opposed and with which he sought to be reconciled. Such a conception of his condition was, however, a deceptive one; its true import --Page 113 --Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: would become apparent when the human mind ultimately overcame its self-estrangement in immature modes of life and consciousness and when it was in a position to recognize both itself and the world it inhabited as manifestations of an infinite or absolute rational essence whose potentialities could only be realized in and through the medium of the finite. Highlight (color #FFFCB6), 29/01/2016 07:50: There is no need to rehearse Kierkegaard's objections to the idealist metaphysic in terms of which this diagnosis of the sources and underlying content of religious ideas was propounded, his own approach being presented within a framework that presupposed rather than purported to supersede the dualistic outlook of traditional theism. At the same time, though, and not perhaps surprisingly, polarities of the kind that had informed Hegel's discussion of the particular standpoint of the unhappy consciousness tended to dominate the account he himself gave of the status and aspirations of the individual in a religious context. Not only was the antithesis between the finite and the eternal, the human and the divine, treated by him as ontologically fundamental; in the final analysis it also governed the picture he drew of human nature and its basic orientation. 